Written by DoesntKnowHowToPlay
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Touhoumon 1.8 uses a completely different type chart from regular Pokemon games. It's similar in places, but it removes and adds some types in ways that need explaining.
 
Dream is similar to Fighting in that many of its moves rely on physical strength, but works a lot differently. Offensively it breaks Steel and casts aside feeble Hearts, but it's not very good against Dream, Flying, Dark, or Reason types. Defensively it has no problem with Illusions and isn't swayed by the Heart, but Dark attacks give them nightmares and Reason proves them as simple dreams. Common Dream-types include Meiling, Kyouko, Koishi, and Ellen.
 
Ghosts are ghosts, as you'd expect. Ghost attacks work well against Ghosts that are accustomed to phasing through things and defy Reason-types that would understand them, but they have no effect against Dark-types, and won't scare Beasts or Heart-types. Defensively they're vulnerable to Beast attacks (animals are more perceptive than people) and Ghost attacks, but they enjoy resistances to Reason (ghosts don't have to make sense) and Miasma (how does one poison the undead?) and immunities to Dark and Illusion. Common Ghost puppets include the Prismrivers, Murasa, and, well, characters who are ghosts. Also Kogasa for some reason.
 
The Flying-type relates to birds, along with the physical act of flying- wind-based attacks such as Aeroblast and Gust are typically not Flying. It's a good offensive type, hitting Beasts and Natures super-effectively, but it fares poorly against Wind (which is basically Electric) and Steel. Its defensive affinities are the same as its offensive match-ups with the addition of immunity to Earth (they're not on the ground!), resistance to Dream, and weakness to Ice. Flying-types includes mostly birds- Mystia, Tokiko, Utsuho, Aya, etc.
 
Beast is a new type- it encompasses animals and other, well, beasts. Defensively it's weak to Flying (most of these are land-bound), Fire (animals do not like fire), and Water (or getting wet), while resistant to Earth and Ghost. On offense it's good against Faith (religious devotion won't save you from wild bears) and Ghost, while ineffective against Nature (which is accustomed to animals) and Flying (birds can just fly away). It's also in the Rock-type slot, so it enjoys a 50% special defense boost in Sandstorm. Beast puppets include Nazrin, Chen, Ran, Momiji, and Rin.
 
Miasma is essentially Poison by a different name. The only differences between it and regular Poison is a resistance to Faith and Heart (prayer and love in practice don't do well against plague) and being super-effective against Water. Miasma puppets include Hina, Yamame, and Eirin.
 
Steel is a much less defensively powerful type than in normal Pokemon, being strong only against Flying, Miasma, Reason, and itself while retaining weaknesses to Dream, Fire, and Earth. Offensively it's much more powerful- it strikes down Flying (how is a bird going to deal with proper weaponry?), Dark (because good guys use swords), and Ice puppets, while faltering against Fire, Water, and itself. Steel puppets and attacks are usually sword-related- Youmu, Meira, etc.
 
Dark is drastically different from what it normally is- while foul play is still part of it it's less the focus of the type. Defensively it's immune to Ghost and resistant to Dream, Ghost, Illusion, and itself, while vulnerable to Steel, Faith, and Heart (the "good" types). Offensively it hits Dream and Reason super-effectively but is resisted by Ghost, Heart, and itself. Dark puppets include Remilia, Flandre, and Rumia.
 
Earth is a combination of the better parts of Rock and Ground- it gets to be immune to Wind and resistant to Fire and Miasma, while only being weak to Grass and Water. Offensively it has no effect on Flying-types and puppets with Levitate, and hits Natures and Beasts ineffectively (they already spend most of their time on the ground), but hits SE on Miasma, Steel, Fire, and Wind. Earth puppets include Suika, Yuugi, and Tenshi.
 
Fire is fire. There's literally nothing different about it other than being resisted by Faith instead of Dragon, no longer resisting Ice, and hitting Beast super-effectively. Fire puppets are fairly predictable- Rin, Utsuho, Sunnymilk, and Mokou.
 
Water is water. It hasn't changed much, but it's gained a very important Miasma weakness that keeps it from being as powerful as in vanilla.
 
Wind is essentially Electric- it encompasses nearly all formally Electric moves, along with many wind-related ones such as Gust and Twister. The only difference between Wind and Electric is that Wind doesn't resist Steel and is resisted by Faith instead of Dragon.
 
Nature is very similar to Grass, but slightly more useful- offensively it isn't as worthless since Dragon is gone and it hits Steel neutrally, and on defense it resists Beast attacks.
 
Ice is nice- offensively it doesn't have any Dragons to hit, but the only things that resist it are Water and Ice types. While its only resistance is still itself, the amazing neutral coverage it provides makes up for it, especially since it's only weak to Fire and Steel.
 
Faith is given to religious figures, and is essentially Holy. It's somewhat similar to Dragon in that it resists Water, Fire, and Wind for seemingly no reason (the divine don't care about the elements), along with Heart, but it's weak to Reason and Beast instead of Ice. (It's worth noting Faith does not resist itself- gods fight after all.) Offensively Faith sways the Heart and brings light to Darkness, but can't do much against Miasma or Reason. Faith puppets include Sanae, Kanako, and Reimu.
 
Reason is similar to Psychic, but mainly includes magic, along with the occasional logical thinker. Defensively Reason is frightened by Ghost, Dark, and Heart attacks while resistant to Dream, Miasma, and Faith. On offense it's good at disproving Faith, shattering Dreams, and introducing medicine to Miasma types, but fares poorly againsts Ghosts (which can't be explained), Steels (the original Psychic counter), and Heart types. Reason puppets include Alice, Patchouli, and Keine.
 
Heart is a weird type- it sort of represents good-will and motivation, but it has some quirky elements. Defensively it's fearlessly resistant to Ghost, Dark, Reason, and itself, but is weak to Faith and Dream. Offensively Heart isn't terribly great, being resisted by Dream, Miasma, Faith, and itself, but it defies Reason and isn't afraid of Dark types. Heart puppets include Reisen, Ellen, Lily White, and Koishi.
 
 
Illusion is also strange, and very uncommon- of the few puppets that get them only two are playable (Advent Yukari and Tori), and one is a derp (I think you can guess which). It's basically Normal, and is given to things that don't exist or are otherwise typeless. Illusion attacks hit super-effectively on nothing, but are resisted by Dark and Dream, and have no effect on Ghosts. Defensively they have no weaknesses, but only benefit from a Ghost immunity.